--- Page 1 ---
Document Number
NRSC-RSAA-ERG-G&GD-SEP' 12-TR-445
Title
MANUAL FOR GEOMORPHOLOGY AND LINEAMENT
MAPPING (WEB VERSION)
Type of Document
Technical Report
Number of pages
28
Author(s)
Geosciences Division
Reviewed by
Head, Geosciences Division
Approved by
DD (RSAA), NRSC
Abstract
This manual highlights the use of satellite remote sensing techniques
for geomorphological and lineament mapping. A three level
classification system based on the origin of landforms was used in
creating geomorphology and lineament database on 1:50,000 scale. A
total of 417 landforms under 11 genetic classes were mapped in this
project. This manual (web version) also addresses uniform
geodatabase standard to be followed during the mapping stage. A
detailed description of the landforms is also provided in the project
manual.
Controlled by
Head, Geosciences Division
Distribution
Unrestricted
Reproduction Rights
This report and its contents are the property of National Remote
Sensing Centre
Document Control Sheet
1 | Page
PDF Creator - PDF4Free v3.0
http://www.pdf4free.com

--- Page 2 ---
National geomorphological and lineament mapping on 1:50,000 scale
using Resourcesat-1 LISS-III data
(ISRO - GSI collaboration under Standing Committee on Geology)
INTRODUCTION
Geomorphology is defined as scientific study of landforms. Geo means 'earth',
Morpho means 'form' and Logy means 'discourse' or 'science'. It is a branch of
Earth Science, which has grown after the advent of Aerial photographs and satellite
data. Geomorphology, along with information on soil, water and vegetation has become
one of the essential inputs in planning for various developmental activities. The scope of
geomorphology has further expanded with the landform maps widely used in various
fields of resource surveys, environmental analysis, hydrological studies, engineering
applications and geo-technical studies. As a result, experts in various fields such as
geoscience, pedology, hydrology, civil engineering, urban planning etc. have started
intuitively using landform maps for various applications in their respective fields. But
classification schemes of landforms used for resource surveys and other research
applications are derived based on the requirement of the specific activity for which it
would be used without giving much emphasis on the genesis of the landforms. Though,
Geological Survey of India (GSI) has prepared the geomorphological map on
1:2,000,000 scale, it is desirable to map the landform of the country on 1:50,000 scale
due to demands from various user communities.
Similarly, the significance of structural lineaments, which reveal the hidden architecture
of rock basement has been recognised only recently with the advancement in geologic
remote sensing. Lineament studies have found applications in various fields of earth
science such as global tectonic studies, delineation of litho-contacts and tectonic units,
analysis of deformation pattern, ground water and oil exploration, geo-technical and
geo-engineering applications and seismo-tectonic studies. Though, small-scale
lineament maps are available, their utility is limited to regional scale tectonic studies.
Also, with the advancement in digital image processing techniques, the satellite data in
2 | Page
PDF Creator - PDF4Free v3.0
http://www.pdf4free.com

